Welcome back! Now, before I get into the
details of my terrain, I'm going to
introduce you to a few things. The first
of which is the First Person Character
Controller. We're going to learn what is a
First Person Controller. Why would we
want to use it? We're going to be using the Standard First Person Controller,
previewing your terrain from ground
level, and that's why I want to have a
First Person Controller, before I go into too much detail on my terrain.
I'm going to talk about Slope Limits, and that will come clear, when we get to it. So, diving
over into Unity, we're going to need a new
Standard Asset Package. You're probably
wondering when we're going to get to these, and we're going to start getting to them on mass,
now. So, import Package Characters for
me, now. Again, if you don't have it, then go
download it from Unity. And import the whole lot this time, because I happen to
know there were some dependencies
between those different things, so if you
try and leave out Cross Platform Input,
for example, then its going to complain at you. So, In
this case, we're going to import the whole lot and accept that it's going to make our project quite
a lot bigger. And here it is, you've got a
load of new standard assets, now. So, dig
yourself into characters, and then, First Person Character Prefabs.
And you've got two. You've got an FPS controller, and a Rigid Body FPS controller. There's a couple
of different ones, and they work in slightly different ways. We're going to
use the FPS Controller. So, drag that prefab, drop it onto your Hierarchy, and let's go
find it in the terrain. Now, in my case it's not in the terrain, so it needs to be
somewhere in the terrain. Put it
somewhere fairly central perhaps, and
then, make sure that it is actually above
ground. So, in my case my terrain height
was, I think, 50. So, you're going to need
to make sure that the height of
your character controller is at least 50. So, I mean look at this guy here, and you look
in the Inspector. I can go all the way down to about 50, before he ends up off
the ground. Now, why would we use a first
person character controller? Well, look at
it. Look at it in the Inspector. Look at what it's got. It's got a Character
Controller on it, which we'll talk about. It has a First Person Script, with a
load of stuff, including head bobbing and
all sorts of stuff. It has a Rigid Body, it has
sound wow, and then, it also has on it a
camera, which is sitting there and you
can see the camera preview. So, if you
play the game, now. Then, you can use...
Firstly, you'll probably fall to the ground. Now, if you fall through the ground, it's because
your controller is a bit too low. It may be
through the ground like this, in which
case you might be stuck in the ground or falling through it. There's no harm in
being a fair distance above the ground,
you'll just fall down and hit the ground
when you start the game. Ok so, that's one
thing, and the other thing you'll get a
complaint here, there are two Audio Listeners. You can now delete the Main Camera
altogether, because you have an FPS
Controller. So, looking through the eyes
of the FPS Controller, the Mouse allows you to look around, and then, you can use Shift to
run, or just hold down W to go forward
at a normal speed. Look you can look at
your world through the view of your character! You can also use Space to jump, and you can
also go up these slopes to a certain
extent. Now, look over on the right hand
side in the Inspector. You've got a Slope
Limit Option there, and what happens as we try
to go up a steep slope is when you get to
45 degrees, in this case, he can't climb,
or she can't climb any further. If I made
my Slope Limit just say 5 degrees over here,
remembering I'm in Play Mode so it won't remember this, then, you won't get anywhere near as far up the
slope, alright. So, I'm going to make my slope and it may be 10, and this is where you can play.
So, that's the purpose of putting an
FPS Controller in, right now, is it's
going to give us an appreciation for
what it's like from the character's view,
and if we see spaces we like over here, where we can see the edge of the world, we can fix
those straight away. Alright so, that's why
I've put an FPS Controller in. You could
see why we would want to use it, I think. Without even going into details it's
going to save us a lot of time and it's
going to do a lot for us. The disadvantage is
we're slightly letting go of control; we're not coding everything from scratch.
We're having to use somebody else's
stuff, but there's plenty of help out
there, about the Standard First Person
Controller, so don't worry about it. So, that's
really all I wanted to show you for the Character Controller. I just want to
talk you through some of it's settings. You have a Slope Limit, as I said, which
is how steep a slope he can
go up. For the Step Offset, Skin Width, Min Move Distance, etc., just have a
look at the little blue book here, if you
want to find out more details about that.
Let it bring up the documentation and have a read. And then, you have a First Person
Controller Script, and you can force him to
walking, you can change the Walk and Run
Speed, you can change the Jump Speed, and Gravity Multipliers and all sorts of
stuff about how you look. And you can
even clamp the looking, so that you can't
look up or down too far. You can have
Field of View Kick, which is to do with how
you're moving and how the field of view
change is. You can have Head Bobbing or
not Head Bobbing, and details of the head
bob. Look at this thing, it's incredible!
You can even change the curve of the
Head Bobbing, the Footstep Sounds, so
loads of stuff going on in the script. You've then got a Rigid Body on the guy, and
you'll notice he has a Capsule Collider.
The shape of collider here is a
Capsule Collider, and that works really
well, when you get to slopes and things.
It just goes well with a slope, it allows
you to kind of start going up the slope,
and it's good for a character. First Person
Controller is a good first approximation
for a character. And then, you have an
Audio Source on this guy, as well, and
that's because he's making footsteps. Ok.
And that's the reason this has an Audio
Source on it. Now, where's the Audio
Listener? That's on the the First Person
Controller thing here, that's attached to
it. Well, what is this? I'm going to
rename it. It's not a first person character,
it's a camera, so I'm just going to rename
the thing that's attached to the FPS Controller to Camera, because that's what
it is. It's a camera that is attached to the FPS Controller, so as the FPS
Controller moves around the scene, the
camera moves with it.
Ok. And that's the purpose of that setting
there,
of that having the camera attached. You're looking through the eyes of this
character camera. So, let's look at the camera. What does it have? Nothing too exciting on it.
The Skybox, the background, the white,
that's controlled here under Skybox, and
we'll talk a little bit later about
maybe changing the Skybox. But that's that
kind of sky element you see in the
distance.
It's a perspective camera, you can change
the field of view, you can see the effect
of that there. If you want to, I'm going to
leave mine at 60, and you can turn on HDR
rendering, if you want to, but I'm going to
leave it off. That's High Dynamic Range,
let's leave things simple for now. And it
has an Audio Listener Attached, and
that's the Single Audio Listener that
we want in the scene, so as we move
around our world, we're going to be hearing things from the perspective of this first
person character. So, that's the FPS character, now. What I would like you to do is make sure you've got one in
your scene, and then, I want you to make
sure that your terrain is inescapable.
So, go around the edges with your character, and make sure that you can't jump out of
the world. Adjust the terrain by raising
it, and adjust the character settings if
you want, as well. I'd suggest quite a low
Slope Limit of maybe 10 or something
like that degrees. Have a go, make sure
that you can't get out of the world in
any direction. Pause the video and do
that now please. Hey, welcome back! So, I am
actually going to work on my terrain a little bit here, now... start working on it. So, if
I go to Terrain Editing View and I'm
going to start going to the edges of
this terrain and at least bring up the
edges to an absolute minimum height, so
that the character can't easily jump out, alright. So, now that I've clicked out of here,
I need to click onto the terrain. I'm going
to use Paint Height. Now, we already have
a default terrain height of 50, so how high should we make the walls around the
edge of this? I'm going to have 50 meters, so I'll add 100 meter height, I want to raise the
terrain to. I want it to go immediately there, and a brush size of 42 looks Ok.
It's going to look really weird inside the game. We're just going to have a wall around the outside, but I'm
not going to spend stupid amounts of
time on the terrain. I'd like to leave that to your creativity.
This is fine, it doesn't matter if the
hills complete on the edges.
The important thing is that there's sufficient height around the outside that the
character cannot get out of here. So, I'm
just going to do it from a large distance.
Pull it up to a maximum of 50, like so. And a very big game, I was playing Dragon Age
Inquisition the other day, my daughter
can find ways into added out terrain or
into places that she shouldn't be able to get to, just because she's an awesome play tester.
She's only 6, but she really does things that the game designers didn't want her to do. [Laughs]
Bless her. [Laughs] But I'm just going to make myself like a cardboard kind of cut out box here.
Clamping the height like this, you don't
have to use this Paint Height Tool, you can
just use the Raise Terrain Tool. This
Paint Height Tool is giving a slightly odd
appearance. So, let's get inside the
terrain. And now, we have this actually
ridiculously artificial looking wall, so
I'm not too impressed with that but let's
just go along to it. Now, if you want to get somewhere quickly, of
course you can do that. You're going to probably want your Default View
back and go into the Scene View, and what of course you can do is just find your
FPS controller, and then, use the Transform Tool to pull it across to the edge of the
terrain. So, here we are, I'm going to approach this wall here. I've got a Slope
Limit of 45, so I'm just going to change that down to say 10 degrees, and now, I'm pretty
confident I'm not going to be able to get out of this terrain. Now, you can do a much
better job of making the edges of your terrain look more like mountains, but this
is almost certainly going to be
inescapable. You'll probably find, that with
a lot of jumping that you can actually get
out. So, you may want to reduce your Jump
Speed. For example, that's one way of
stopping that happening. I'm going to do
that I think. See how a Jump Speed of 5 works. Now, I can't jump anywhere near as high.
Arguably, this character in this game doesn't need to be able to jump at all, so there is
something to be said for just taking the
Jump Speed all the way down to 0, because even at 5 I
can work my way up the side. So, if you set the Jump Speed to 0, you won't be able to leave the ground
and jump. And now, you really won't be able to escape the terrain. So, I'm going to suggest a Jump
Speed of 0 for this guy, I don't see that
we need jumping. If you want jumping you're
going to have to play with the settings
more, to make sure your character can't get out,
But we've done the basic thing here, there's possibly a hole over there, where the
character could get out, but I don't think so.
With a 10 degree slope and no jumping, I
think we are trapped in this soon to be
zombie infested hell hole. So, that's the
first person character controller, that's
the purpose of putting it in the scene, and
I shall see you soon! Have fun playing with that!